
Skip to contentSkip to site indexSection Navigation
Search
U.S.
GIVE THE TIMES

Account
U.S.
|
How Did George Floyd Die? Here’s What We Know
Share full article


How Did George Floyd Die? Here’s What We Know
A private autopsy commissioned by the family concluded that his death was a homicide, brought about by compression of his neck and back by Minneapolis police officers.

Share full article



Terrence Floyd visits the site where his brother George Floyd was detained by the Minneapolis police last week. George Floyd’s death was ruled a homicide by a family autopsy.Credit...Victor J. Blue for The New York Times
By Frances Robles and Audra D. S. Burch
June 2, 2020
George Floyd, 46, died after being handcuffed on the street in the custody of the Minneapolis police on Memorial Day. An officer responding to a report that Mr. Floyd had tried to pass a fake $20 bill helped hold him down by lodging a knee on his neck for nearly nine minutes.

He died shortly after lapsing into unconsciousness.

But as protests continue to rage across the country demanding justice for Mr. Floyd, dueling narratives have emerged about the precise cause of his death. The criminal complaint supporting a murder charge for the officer, which referred to the Hennepin County medical examiner’s preliminary findings, said the autopsy had discounted traumatic asphyxia or strangulation as the cause of Mr. Floyd’s death.

ProtestersThe people giving voice to their anger are individual pieces of a movement, like drops of water to a wave.
But on Monday afternoon, the lawyers representing his family presented a very different version of how Mr. Floyd died. In their telling, three officers on the scene killed Mr. Floyd and should be held criminally responsible.

The private autopsy by doctors hired by Mr. Floyd’s family determined that he died not just because of the knee on his neck — held there by the officer, Derek Chauvin — but also because of two other officers who helped pin him down by applying pressure on his back. All three officers were fired last week, as was a fourth officer at the scene.

The cause of death, according to the private autopsy, was mechanical asphyxia and the manner of death was homicide.

Shortly after the family’s autopsy findings were announced, the Hennepin County medical examiner released its own findings, also concluding that the manner of death was homicide. The county attributed the cause of death to “cardiopulmonary arrest complicating law enforcement subdual, restraint, and neck compression.”

In other words, Mr. Floyd’s heart stopped beating and his lungs stopped taking in air while he was being restrained by law enforcement. The one-page summary also noted that Mr. Floyd was intoxicated with fentanyl and had recently used methamphetamines.

The criminal complaint said that the autopsy “revealed no physical findings that support a diagnosis of traumatic asphyxia or strangulation.” Mr. Floyd, the complaint said, had underlying health conditions, including coronary artery disease and hypertensive heart disease.

A 10-minute cellphone video of the encounter showed Mr. Chauvin holding his knee on the back of Mr. Floyd’s neck for eight minutes and 46 seconds. Mr. Floyd was unresponsive for nearly three minutes of the encounter after he repeatedly gasped, “I can’t breathe.”

The findings by the family’s private medical examiners directly contradict the report that there was no asphyxia, said Dr. Allecia M. Wilson, of the University of Michigan, one of the doctors who examined his body. The physical evidence showed that the pressure applied led to his death, she said. In an interview, Dr. Michael Baden, who also participated in the private autopsy, said there was also some hemorrhaging around the right carotid area.

Although she has not had access to the full medical examiner’s report, Dr. Wilson said: “We have seen accounts from the complaint and based on that, yes our findings do differ. Some of the information I read from that complaint states that there was no evidence of traumatic asphyxia. This is the point in which we do disagree. There is evidence in this case of mechanical or traumatic asphyxia.”

She noted that she did not have access to toxicology results, tissue samples or some organs. Those items are not likely to change the results, she said.

The private doctors also said that any underlying conditions Mr. Floyd had did not kill him or contribute to his death.

“He was in good health,” Dr. Baden said.

The private autopsy concluded that even without evidence of “traumatic” asphyxia, such as broken bones, the compression caused by the officers still led to Mr. Floyd’s death by depriving his brain of blood and oxygen and his lungs of air.

But Dr. Baden acknowledged that the pressure was not necessarily visible in the autopsy because by the time any doctors reviewed the body, the pressure had been released. He added that abrasions on the left side of Mr. Floyd’s face and shoulder showed how hard he was pressed against the pavement.

“The video is real,” Dr. Baden said.

The doctors said the determination of cause and the manner of death were based on reviewing the circumstances, including the video, but also additional findings determined in their autopsy.

“We do have physical evidence that supports that there was pressure applied to his neck,” Dr. Wilson said.w

Dr. Baden added, “The main thing is that we both say it’s a homicide due to the way he was being subdued.”

Conducting the examination for the family were Dr. Wilson, director of autopsy and forensic services at the University of Michigan, and Dr. Baden, who was the chief medical examiner for New York City in the late 1970s. Dr. Baden is best known as host of the HBO television series “Autopsy.” He also did the private autopsy of Michael Brown, who was killed by a police officer in Ferguson, Mo., in 2014.

It is not unusual, he said, for autopsy reports to differ. “This is not necessarily science, it’s medicine. Medicine is an art and a science.”

Ben Crump, the lawyer representing the Floyd family, said Mr. Floyd’s death was the result of three officers who came into physical contact with him, compressing his neck and back.

Mr. Crump said Mr. Chauvin should be charged with first-degree murder rather than the lesser charge of third-degree murder he is facing, and that the other officers should face the “fullest extent of the law.”

He said that the family was distrusting of the Minneapolis Police Department based, in part, on the sanitized way it described how Mr. Floyd was detained, and that it was “encouraged” that Attorney General Keith Ellison of Minnesota was taking over the prosecution.

The day after Mr. Floyd’s death, the police statement described him as a suspected forger who “appeared to be under the influence,” who “physically resisted officers” and who appeared to be “suffering medical distress.” It never mentioned any officer’s role in his death.

Hours later, a graphic video emerged that showed a significantly different account.

Nicholas Bogel-Burroughs contributed reporting.

Frances Robles is a Florida-based correspondent who also covers Puerto Rico and Central America. Her investigation of a Brooklyn homicide detective led to more than a dozen murder convictions being overturned and won a George Polk award.

A version of this article appears in print on June 2, 2020, Section A, Page 25 of the New York edition with the headline: Reports Give Dueling Accounts on the Exact Cause of Floyd’s Death. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe
See more on: George Floyd, Derek Chauvin
Share full article


Related Content
Site Index
Site Information Navigation
© 2026 The New York Times Company
NYTCoContact UsAccessibilityWork with usAdvertiseT Brand StudioPrivacy PolicyCookie PolicyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpSubscriptions